So we've written a couple of scripts
we have kind of this physics sandbox,
where we can move the player around.
But now we need to start turning this
into an actual game with scoring and
timers, and a game loop, and
we need to be able to restart the game.
There's a lot of stuff to do there,
and a lot of times,
even in large games, you'll have
this class called a game manager.
It's not something that you have to have,
it's not something that you
have to call this class.
It's just kind of a de facto architectural
approach to making games in unity,
where there's a script component
called game manager, and
it's used to control high level
aspects of the games loop.
So, this might include things
like initializing a level,
along with other state changes,
such as game over or restarting the game.
So a game manager can do lot of things,
but generally,
it keeps track of the business
logic in the game.
So it might also keep track of
just important game wide numbers,
like scores or a round timer.
It's pretty flexible in its definition,
but
it's a thing that you will find
a lot of unity developers doing.
They'll create this class
called a GameManager and
do a lot of their business logic there for
the game.
So, because this class
is doing a lot of stuff,
you can imagine that there's
actually a lot in here.
This is not the full class,
this is split over a couple of slides,
and we'll go through this one
piece at a time, and go back and
forth between Unity as we code this.
So first, we need to set up variables,
where we'll keep track of a couple
of different values in the game.
And includes the players score,
the opponents score,
the amount of time for each round,
the remaining time in each round,
a boolean to keep track of the game state,
and
then global values for
use by a couple of other scripts.
So you'll see here that these
variables are called player score and
opponent score, that's not
the actual number for the score.
The score, remember is in the score
components, so this is referencing that
component and we'll drop those into
the inspector after we create the script.
At the start of the game,
the timescale will be set to zero, so
you can modify the speed at
which time moves in unity,
it's by default moving at a speed of one.
But if you wanted to do like a slow-mo
effect, you could set it to 0.5,
and all of the physics updates
would move at half speed.
If you set it all the way to zero,
that's how you pause the game, time stops.
And so at the start of the game we're
going to set the timescale to zero to
pause the game, we're going to
set the value for the game clock.
Which is the amount of time
the game should take in seconds,
which is a float value of 60 here for
one minute.
And then we'll update the timer for
the first time calling this method
update timer, which we'll write later.
So there's a lot to do here,
so let's get started.
I'm going to switch to Unity, I'm going to
create a new game object
here called Game Manager.
And this is just the last values that
were we were using on the transform,
but we wanna reset this to zero,
not because it really matters.
But it's just good practice to reset
your transforms to the origin,
just to indicate that in the case
of like this game manager,
they don't actually need to be
at that particular position.
So you can always reset the transform
by going to this little
three dotted menu here next to transform,
and choose reset.
So I have a GameManager GameObject,
I need a GameManager script.
So I'll create a new C SharpScript, and
we'll call it GameManager without a space.
And then finally.
I'll drag that script component
to the Game Manager Game Object,
and now it's attached.
And increase the size here,
you'll notice that unity has
actually given that script a special icon.
It's not because it's different
than any of these other scripts,
it's just that game manager is so
common as a name for this type of a class,
that unity just includes an icon for
it so that you can check it out.
So I'm going to go ahead and
open the GameManager here,
and the first thing that we need to do,
is create our variables.
So I'm gonna remove these
namespaces we don't need,
and then we need a serialized field for
the score, this will be the player score.
We need a serialized field with a score
that will be the opponent's score.
Now we need another serialized field
that will be a float value for
the game time in seconds.
Seconds, spell correctly, and
that will be a default value of 60.
You don't have to create this as
a serialized field if you don't want to,
you could just leave that off, and
always have the game set to 60.
But again, when you're creating games in
unity, it's nice to expose values like
this, so that you can try out different
values as you're tuning the game.
Maybe around time of a minute is too
short or too long, and you want to easily
adjust that, and so you can change it
right in the inspector if you wanna.
So we need another float value
that will be the timer, and
even though we have
the game time in seconds
that's soaring the amount of time
that each round should take.
We still need another float value,
that's the actual timer that
will be keeping track of time.
We have a boolean value
called m_gameIsPlaying,
and by default we'll set that to false,
because when the game first starts up,
the game is not playing.
We have to hit the spacer
to start the game.
And then finally,
we'll have one more variable here,
that will be a public static float value.
And this is actually going
to be a property, and
it's a property because
I'm capitalizing it.
And we'll call this RespawnHeight,
and we'll set to a value of 0.25.
We'll use this later on,
this is going to be the y height,
at which a player should respond.
So if the player falls off
the edge of the board,
this is the height at which
we should trigger a Respawn.
And we'll other later on to I
think the rolling controller,
sorry, the rolling movement script,
but for now,
we're just leaving this
accessible in the game manager.
There's a couple of other ways we could
have done that, we could have put it
directly on the rolling movement script,
but this is a good opportunity to
see an a global value that you
might want to access other places.
So, in the start method,
get rid of this comment,
we want to set the timescale to zero,
to pause the game at the start.
So to do that,
we'll access the time class,
and we'll set time scale,
equal to a floating point value of zero.
Then we wanna set to the game
timer to the number of seconds.
In a round, so
we have that timer ,and at the start
we wanna set the timer to
the game time and second,
so we'll start the clock at 60 seconds.
And then we want to update the timer text,
and that's a method we'll write later.
And I'm actually just going to comment
out that method call for now, so
that it's not creating errors, but we do
wanna remember that we need to call there.
All right, so we have the start,
of our game manager here,
there's a lot more to do but
I'll save that file,
and let's switch back to the slides,
and see what's next.
So, every physics update,
we need to actually update the timer,
and then if the timer runs out,
we should end the game.
So this is another good
example of something that it's
a better idea to do it in
fixed update if you can,
you could do it in update and
say multiply by delta time.
But just keeping track of it in
a fixed update that you always know,
is gonna run at the same time.
Usually better for actual game timers,
if you want a little bit better
predictability and precision.
So, we have our fixed update here, and
it's going to subtract from the timer.
If the timer hits zero,
we're gonna enter the game overstate,
where game is playing is set to fix, and
then the timescale once again,
is set back to zero.
So let's switch over to our code,
and let's write that up.
So we need FixedUpdate, right?
And then if the game isn't playing.
We should stop here, and that's where
we're using that Boolean value.
So if game is playing is not
true, then just return.
So even though fixed update has returned
type of void, we can just return early.
And if the game is not playing,
so if game is playing as false,
we wanna just stop,
because we don't wanna update the timer.
We don't want to do anything
else that's in fixed update, so
it's just an early exit.
So next we want to subtract
the fixed delta time from the timer.
So this is interesting,
we have the timer
variable that we created,
and then we want to Decrease
it by Time.fixedDeltaTime.
So, update and fixed update and
the time class have
a measurement of delta time.
Delta time is how much time has
elapsed since the last update.
So in update,
you can actually use time.Deltatime,
and that's going to give you
how much time has elapsed
in seconds,
since the previous frame was rendered.
In this case, we're in fixed update,
we want the amount of time that's
happened since the last fixed update.
And even though fixed update
is running at a uniform rate,
so maybe we know that exact value,
maybe it's one divided by 50.
If we know that it's running at
a rate of 50 times a second,
really, because this can
change elsewhere in unity.
It's good to just use fixedDeltaTime,
so that we have that exact measurement.
So every fixed update,
its going to subtract
the amount of time that has elapsed
since the last fixed update, and
that's how we're gonna
decrement the timer.
At a consistent rate,
the same rate at which time is
actually passing inside a fixed update.
So, if the timer hits zero.
Then we need to enter the game overstate.
So if timer is less than or equal to zero,
because it could potentially
be less than zero.
Remember it's just subtracting
fixedDeltaTime, so it could go below zero.
So if it's less than or equal to zero,
then we want to call a GameOver method,
all right?
And we wanna set the timer to zero, and
that's just not totally
necessary in this case.
But it's good habit to set your timers to
zero, once they've actually hit the value.
That becomes really important
in areas like animation,
where you might have something
running along an s curve.
You don't want to overshoot its value,
you wanna make sure that once something
has hit zero, less than or equal to zero,
then you're actually setting it to zero.
So that any subsequent code
that's using that timer,
is behaving the way it should be.
So we need to write that GameOver method,
so we'll save void GameOver.
And in GameOver,
we wanna say game IsPlaying = false, and
then Pause the game by setting
the time scale to zero.
So again, we'll say Time.timeScale.
Is zero.
We could have potentially
put these two methods sorry,
these two statements right
here where Game Over is.
But sometimes using methods like this is
nice just for the sake of clarity, so
that we know exactly what's happening.
Where the timer hits zero,
it's calling GameOver.